Trying to untangle the weaved mess that is
the birth and growth of certain sub-genres
of games can be a daunting task, especially
when popular casual titles take to mixing
RTS, Strategy and Puzzle elements (along with
a dash of luck) in order to create their addicting
gameplay. Things get even more complicated
when you begin to ponder a game like Jack
of All Tribes by G5 Entertainment and Divo
Games as it could easily be considered a casual
RTS in the style of games like The Settlers,
but familiar casual gaming tropes like manually
harvesting food and resources gives it an
edge that could all-too-easily be mistaken
for a 'free' Facebook game.
Thankfully players won't be waiting 2 minutes
for their strawberries to ripen as this game
is all about efficiency and working against
the clock to make each tribe you visit happy
and self-dependent. Orders are carried out
intelligently and automatically by the various
tribesman at your disposal, requiring only
a tap on an object to provide an order such
as harvesting wood, carrying gold or riding
the pet dinosaur that protects the village.
More workers can be earned by creating huts
in the predetermined slots available in each
level, though you'll need to balance the increase
in mouths with the resources you have available
as each tribesman will need food to stay active.
Each level presents a small series of challenges,
be it to upgrade some of the houses to beautify
the landscape or to pay off a greedy shaman
holding you to ransom for some much-needed
rain. Occasionally this leads to unlocking
hidden areas where you'll have to play a quick
hidden-object challenge to earn special items
that boost the abilities of your tribesman
(reducing their need for food, speeding them
up as they run around, etc.). Later levels
can seriously test your ability to quickly
manage all the small tasks that need to be
covered, but at worst a slower player will
simply find themselves missing out on getting
a star on completion.
Watching the little tribesman perform their
various duties while constantly changing their
outfits to suit the occasion is amusing and
while there aren't a lot of fancy effects,
the 2D sprites do a good job of conveying
important information as quickly as possible.
There are some overlapping issues on busier
stages that can cause you to cancel or start
an upgrade when you don't require it, but
this rarely, if ever, affects the outcome
of a level.
Jack of All Tribes is an entertaining distraction
that may test your multitasking skills, but
despite invoking RTS elements it lacks any
real strategic elements to the gameplay. There's
something addictive about quickly and methodically
clearing each stage despite the lack of challenge,
making it a great choice for those after a
light title to eat up those choice spare moments
in their day.